The following code simulates a dataset where earnings are influenced by both schooling and ability, with some random noise added. 
The code conducts various regression analyses to explore the relationships between earnings, schooling, and ability, 
and it also examines the relationship between the residuals of the earnings and schooling regression and the residuals of the schooling and ability regression. 
This can be used to investigate whether any unexplained variation in earnings is related to schooling or ability.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The first part of the code, we specify our initial assumptions regarding the variables:

generate ability = rnormal(1,2)
generate schooling=0.3*ability + rnormal(0,1.3)
generate earnings =-0.4*schooling + 1.2*ability+ runiform()

We first generate the ability variable, which, based on our initial specification follows a normal distribution with a mean of one, and a standard deviation of two.
Then, we define the schooling variable, which depends poisitively on ability and a random term following normal distribution with mean zero, and standard deviation of 1.3.
Finally, we generate the earnings variable, which in this context can be interpreted as the "true", population regression function,i.e., the true relationship in
this hypothetical experiment that describes the relationship among earnings, schooling, and ability. Specifically, earnings depends negatively on schooling and positively on ability,
with an error term following a uniform distribution.

The second part of the code we analyze the effects of an omitted variable, namely ability, on the properties of the regression:

regress earnings schooling ability, r
regress earnings schooling, r

In the first regression we can see that the esmitated regression coefficients on schooling and ability are very close to their pre-specified values, also
both are statistically significant, since in this regression we estimated the "true" population regression function this comes by no surprise. 
In the second regression, by omitting ability the coefficient on schooling becomes biased, i.e., it takes on some of the explanatory power of the ability variable
and becomes downward biased (since ability is positively correlated to earnings, and positively to schooling, the variable on schooling becomes upwardy biased-
which can be shown analytically as well, using the omitted variable bias formula).


In the third part of the code, we can see a scatterplot of the schooling and earning variables.

twoway (scatter earning schooling, mcolor(gray) msize(small) msymbol(o))||lfit (earning schooling)

We can see that based on this plot, we might think that there is a weak, but positive relationship between the two variables, but this is just correlation, not causation.
Since we know that ability is the confounding variable driving this positive relationship, because the pre-specified, "true", relationship between earning and schooling is negative!
This example illustrates that it is very easy to confuse correlation and causation, without controlling for other factors, or setting up a proper randomized experiment.

In the fourth part of the code, we can see 3 additional regressions involving the ability, schooling, and earning variables.

regress earnings ability, r
predict earnings_res, residuals (earnings_res -> variation in earnings that is unexplained by ability [this should be schooling + random noise]))

regress schooling ability
predict res_schol, residuals (res_schol -> variation in schooling that is unexplained by ability [this should be just random noise]))

regress earnings_res res_schol, r (earnings_res is the variation in earnings that is unexplained by ability, while res_schol should be variation in schooling that is unexplained by ability, so the coefficient on res_schol is the pure effect of schooling on earnings, and as such it is identical to the coefficient on schooling in the "true" population regression function)

We can tell in advance that the regression of earnings on ability will be biased, i.e., the error term will not be exogenous since the schooling variable is missing
from the equation, consequently the coefficient on ability will be biased. Specifically, it will be downwardly biased as schooling and ability are positively correlated,
while schooling and earning are negatively correlated. In contrast, in the regression of schooling on ability the coefficient on ability will not be biased, 
as this regression specification matches the "true" pre-specified population relationship between schooling and ability. 

By plotting the residuals of the above two regressions, we can see that the residuals from the earnings-on-ability regression will be much more scattered compared to
the clearly well-behaved residuals from the schooling-on-ability regression.

Finally, by regressing the residuals from the earnings-on-ability (biased) regression on the residuals from the schooling-on-ability (unbiased) regression we can see
that the slope coefficient matches the slope coefficient from the first regression, which involved regressing earnings on schooling and ability. This
is due to the partialing-out effect interpretation of regression. Specifically, in this context we know in advance that the residuals from the earnings-on-ability equation
will contain the variation in earnings that is not explained by ability, and we also know that the residuals from the schooling-on-ability regression will contain the variation
in schooling that is not explained by ability (which we know is just a random process, specifically a normal distribution with mean 0, and standard deviation of 1.3). By regressing the
residuals from the earnings-on-ability regression (i.e, the variation in earnings that is not explained by ability-that is schooling) on the residuals 
from the schooling-on-ability regression (i.e., the variation in schooling that is not explained by ability) we get back the coefficient of the schooling variable from the original
"true" population regression, which involved both explanatory variables.
